New mini book:  OS setup for Fortran developement (#152)
fortran-lang/fortran-lang.org: learn/os_setup/install_gfortran.md

---
layout: book
title: Installing GFortran
permalink: /learn/os_setup/install_gfortran
---

GFortran is the name of the [GNU Fortran project](https://gcc.gnu.org/fortran/). The main [wiki](https://gcc.gnu.org/wiki/GFortran) page offers many helpful links about GFortran, as well as Fortran in general. In this guide, the installation process for GFortran on Windows, Linux, and macOS is presented in a beginner-friendly format based on the information from [GFortranBinaries](https://gcc.gnu.org/wiki/GFortranBinaries).

## Windows

Three sources provide quick and easy way to install GFortran compiler on Windows:
1. [http://www.equation.com](http://www.equation.com/servlet/equation.cmd?fa=fortran), provides 32 and 64-bit x86
 executables of the latest (10.2) gcc-version.
2. [TDM GCC](https://jmeubank.github.io/tdm-gcc/articles/2020-03/9.2.0-release), provides 32 and 64-bit x86 executables of the 9.2 gcc-version.

> 3. [MinGW-w64](http://mingw-w64.org/doku.php/download/mingw-builds) provides a 64-bit x86 executable of the 7.2 gcc-version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. [MinGW-w64](http://mingw-w64.org/doku.php/download/mingw-builds) provides a 64-bit x86 executable of the 8.1.0 gcc-version.
```

I've downloaded this particular distribution and can confirm that it contains `gcc` version `8.1.0`. (The associated download page has the wrong version listed.)

```bash
yum install gcc-gfortran
```

### Arch-based (Arch Linux, Antergos, Manjaro, etc...)
```bash
sudo pacman -S gcc-fortran
```

## MacOS
### Xcode
If you have Xcode installed, open a terminal window and type:
```bash
xcode-select --install
```
### Binaries
Check this github repo: [fxcoudert/gfortran-for-macOS](https://github.com/fxcoudert/gfortran-for-macOS/releases) to directly install binaries.
### Homebrew
```bash
brew install gcc
```
### Fink
GNU-gcc Package [link](https://pdb.finkproject.org/pdb/browse.php?summary=GNU+Compiler+Collection+Version)
### MacPorts
Search for available gcc versions:
```bash
port search gcc
```
Install a gcc version:
```bash
sudo port install gcc10
```
---
## OpenCoarrays

The best way to describe [OpenCoarrays](http://www.opencoarrays.org/) is to directly quote from the official site: *OpenCoarrays is an open-source software project that produces an application binary interface (ABI) used by the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) Fortran front-end to build executable programs that leverage the parallel programming features of Fortran 2018*. Therefore, since OpenCoarrays is not a separate compiler, we include it here, under gfortran.

> The difference with gfortran is that, while with gfortran one can write perfectly valid code involving coarrays features, the generated code will only run in a single thread. OpenCoarrays allows to run code in parallel in a similar way as with MPI:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While with gfortran you can compile perfectly valid code using coarrays, the generated binaries will only run in a single image (_image_ is a Fortran term for a parallel process), that is, in serial mode. OpenCoarrays allows running code in parallel on shared- and distributed-memory machines, similar to MPI:
```

```bash

> $ cafrun -n [number_of_threads] [executable_name]

Reviewer 2: Few edits here. We don't use `$` elsewhere so I remove it from here. Second, I don't think "threads" is quite accurate, I suggest "images". Third, square brackets often denote optional arguments, so I think angle brackets are more appropriate.

```suggestion
cafrun -n <number_of_images> <executable_name>
```

```

The process of installation is provided in a clear and comprehensive manner on the official site. 

> We emphasize here, that native installation in Windows is not possible. It is only possible through WSL. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We emphasize that native installation on Windows is not possible. It is only possible through WSL.
```

---
layout: book
title: Installing GFortran
permalink: /learn/os_setup/install_gfortran
---

GFortran is the name of the [GNU Fortran project](https://gcc.gnu.org/fortran/). The main [wiki](https://gcc.gnu.org/wiki/GFortran) page offers many helpful and informational links about GFortran, as well as Fortran in general. In this guide, the installation process for GFortran on Windows, Linux, and MacOS is presented in a beginner-friendly format based on information from [GFortranBinaries](https://gcc.gnu.org/wiki/GFortranBinaries).

## Windows

> In Windows, there are two main *vendors* that offer builds of GFortran, namely the [MinGW](http://www.mingw.org/) and the [Cygwin](https://cygwin.com/index.html). Directly derived from MinGW is the [Mingw-w64](http://mingw-w64.org/) project that offers 64-bit executables for many platforms. 

Reviewer 3: Hm, I would not call Cygwin and MinGW "vendors" - not sure what to call them instead. Perhaps "user environments"? Sounds a bit lame, though.

Reviewer: I would refer to them as different ports of the GNU compiler collection (and related tooling) to Windows; Cygwin aims to provide a large potion of POSIX functionality through its Cygwin environment, whereas MinGW instead aims for native Windows compatibility (based off Microsoft libraries).

Author: @arjenmarkus following @LKedward advice I just removed this specific part altogether, in order to avoid this unnecessary confusion at a beginner's tutorial.

> In Windows, there are two main *vendors* that offer builds of GFortran, namely the [MinGW](http://www.mingw.org/) and the [Cygwin](https://cygwin.com/index.html). Directly derived from MinGW is the [Mingw-w64](http://mingw-w64.org/) project that offers 64-bit executables for many platforms. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
To avoid confusion for beginners, I think this is best left out.

As of this date, there are three sources that provide quick and easy to install GFortran compiler under Windows:
1. [http://www.equation.com](http://www.equation.com/servlet/equation.cmd?fa=fortran), provides x32 and x64 executables of the latest (10.2) gcc-version.
2. [TDM GCC](https://jmeubank.github.io/tdm-gcc/articles/2020-03/9.2.0-release), provides x32 and x64 executables of the 9.2 gcc-version.

> 3. [Mingw-w64](http://mingw-w64.org/doku.php/download/mingw-builds) provides x64 executable of the 7.2 gcc-version.

Reviewer 3: Luckily there is a new distribution that provides version 10.2.

There is a tight relation between MSYS2 and MinGW-w64, this is not quite clear from the text, but I agree that it is pretty difficult to describe it. I struggle with it myself all the time. This bit should be rewritten. No critique, mind you, it is just that the current text is not sufficiently precise and might cause the same confusion as I have had (or still have).

Reviewer: I added further text briefly describing MSYS2, Cygwin and WSL and their differences so I will mark this discussion point as resolved.

### Homebrew
```bash
brew install gcc
```
### Fink
GNU-gcc Package [link](https://pdb.finkproject.org/pdb/browse.php?summary=GNU+Compiler+Collection+Version)
### MacPorts
Search for available gcc versions:
```bash
port search gcc
```
Install a gcc version:
```bash
sudo port install gcc10
```
---
## OpenCoarrays

The best way to describe [OpenCoarrays](http://www.opencoarrays.org/) is to directly quote from the official site: *OpenCoarrays is an open-source software project that produces an application binary interface (ABI) used by the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) Fortran front-end to build executable programs that leverage the parallel programming features of Fortran 2018*. Therefore, since OpenCoarrays is not a separate compiler, we include it here, under gfortran.

The difference with gfortran is that, while with gfortran one can write perfectly valid code involving coarrays features, the generated code will only run in a single thread. OpenCoarrays allows to run code in parallel in a similar way as with MPI:
```bash
$ cafrun -n [number_of_threads] [executable_name]
```

The process of installation is provided in a clear and comprehensive manner on the official site. 

> We emphasize here, that direct installation in Windows is not possible. It is only possible through WSL. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We emphasize here, that native installation in Windows is not possible. It is only possible through WSL. 
```

Three sources provide quick and easy way to install GFortran compiler on Windows:
1. [http://www.equation.com](http://www.equation.com/servlet/equation.cmd?fa=fortran), provides 32 and 64-bit x86
 executables of the latest (10.2) gcc-version.
2. [TDM GCC](https://jmeubank.github.io/tdm-gcc/articles/2020-03/9.2.0-release), provides 32 and 64-bit x86 executables of the 9.2 gcc-version.

> 3. [Mingw-w64](http://mingw-w64.org/doku.php/download/mingw-builds) provides a 64-bit x86 executable of the 7.2 gcc-version.

Reviewer 3: I suggest: [MinGW-w64/MSYS2](https://github.com/msys2) provides 32 and 64-bit x86 executable of the 10.2 gcc-version

In all the above choices, the process is straightforward—just download the installer and follow the installation wizard.

### Unix-like development on Windows
For those familiar with a unix-like development environment, several emulation options are available on Windows each of which provide packages for gfortran:

* __Cygwin:__ A runtime environment that provides POSIX compatibility to Windows;

> * __MSYS2:__ A collection of Unix-like development tools for compiling native Windows binaries;

Reviewer 3: I suggest: __MinGW-w64:__ ...

(There is more to say about all this, but that is not suitable for an introductory text like this! I have struggled with it recently, hence my emphasis on getting it least wrong)
